journal/week1.md, before:

# Week 1 — App Containerization

## Containers, gitpod and Docker

This week I have been working to take the two core components of the application, the frontend and the backend and containerise them using Docker.  This is a precursor to deploying the components as containers in ECS.  It also allows local development and testing directly with containers.

Using gitpod launched from the github repo is again the simplest way to develop.  There is a Docker extension for VSCode that should be preinstalled, however I had to install it manually from the marketplace the first time.  You may have to as well.  It is this extension:

![Docker Ext in GitPod](assets/docker-gitpod-01.png)

## Containerization of the Backend

### Testing at the command with Python

The backend application is found under backend-flask/ in the repo.  It is a python flask application and can be easily tested on the command line.   There is a python requirements file that is used with pip to install the flask and flask-cors prereqs.  To run and test do :

```sh
cd backend-flask
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
export FRONTEND_URL="*"
export BACKEND_URL="*"
python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
cd ..
```

This should run the backend, you can test the APIs there return JSON, follow these steps:

- Unlock the port (4567) on the PORTS tab
- Right click and open the link associated with port 4567
- You will need to append a valid URL - '/api/activities/home'

You should see a valid JSON response

![backend running](assets/backend-run-01.png)

### Create the Dockerfile

You are now ready to convert these steps into a Dockerfile so that you can build a container to simplify the deployment and launch of the backend.

The Docker file needs to go in the backend-flask folder - 'backend-flask/Dockerfile'.  Create this file, here's the content:

```Dockerfile
FROM python:3.10-slim-buster

WORKDIR /backend-flask

COPY requirements.txt requirements.txt
RUN pip3 install -r requirements.txt

COPY . .

ENV FLASK_ENV=development

EXPOSE ${PORT}
# python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
CMD [ "python3", "-m" , "flask", "run", "--host=0.0.0.0", "--port=4567"]
```

Next up you can build the container, this actually creates the container within the docker framework.

### Build the BE Container

Build the container using the following.  Ensure you are in the GitPod Repo Root.

```sh
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
docker build -t  backend-flask ./backend-flask
```

This will build your image and you should see it in the Docker extension on the side bar.  Notice you have the base image requested in the FROM line in the Dockerfile and your new backend-flash image:

![backend container built](assets/backend-flask-01.png)

The container images can also be listed with

```sh
docker image ls
```
You should see

```sh
REPOSITORY      TAG                IMAGE ID       CREATED         SIZE
backend-flask   latest             c964c1371d44   9 minutes ago   129MB
python          3.10-slim-buster   b5d627f77479   2 weeks ago     118MB
```

You are now ready to test running your backend container.

### Running the BE Container

The container can be run using the docker command line tool.  You need to specify the port mapping in order to publish port 4567.  It is also necessary at this stage to provide some URL environment variables, or the application with hit an HTTP 500 server error.  

There are a few ways to pass the required env vars in, here's an example using -e on the docker run command line.

```sh
export FRONTEND_URL="*"
export BACKEND_URL="*"
docker run --rm -p 4567:4567 -it  -e FRONTEND_URL -e BACKEND_URL backend-flask
unset FRONTEND_URL="*"
unset BACKEND_URL="*"
```

The above commands should be successful and should launch a container right from the gitpod terminal/workspace.

![backend container running](assets/backend-flask-02.png)

Now test the access in the browser by ensure the port is unlocked in the ports tab and clicking the link.  Remember to suffix with a valid api entry point such as the /api/activities/home.  You should get the same valid JSON response as earlier.

You will notice that docker runs in the foreground and doesn't relinquish your shell.  Ctrl-C and run it again with the '-d' option, it will run in the background.  This allows you to inspect the running container with 'docker ps' or 'docker logs'.

```sh
docker run --rm -p 4567:4567 -it  -e FRONTEND_URL -e BACKEND_URL -d backend-flask
```

## Containerization of the Frontend

Now you have a container that we can launch to run the backend, you need to create the frontend container.

The frontend application is found under frontend-react-js/ in the repo.  It is a React application and requires node and various modules to run.  You need to run npm install to get this working.

### NPM Install

Simply do:

```sh 
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
cd frontend-react-js
npm i
```

This will take a few minutes to install.  You should see this somewhere near the bottom of the output.

```sh
added 1471 packages, and audited 1472 packages in 22s
```

### Create FE Dockerfile

The FE container, of course, also needs a Dockerfile.  Create this in the frontend-react-js folder, - 'Dockerfile'.

```dockerfile
FROM node:16.18

ENV PORT=3000

COPY . /frontend-react-js
WORKDIR /frontend-react-js
RUN npm install
EXPOSE ${PORT}
CMD ["npm", "start"]
```

This container is a bit easier, you are already ready to build it:

```sh
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
docker build -t frontend-react-js ./frontend-react-js
```

The container will now show up in the Docker extension of VSCode, alongside the new base layer, node.

![Node container built](assets/front-end-node-01.png)

### Run FE Container

Now it is built, you can run the FE container from the command line.  Again, remember to background it with -d.

```sh
docker run -p 3000:3000 -d frontend-react-js
```

Again, check the ports tab to ensure the new frontend port (3000) is unlocked and test in the browser.  If all is well you now see the Cruddur! front page!

##  Docker Compose

With more than one container in an application, it is very useful to orchestrate their launch and control.  This is done with Docker Compose.

I created a docker-compose.yml file which needs to sit at the root of the project.

```yaml
version: "3.8"
services:
  backend-flask:
    environment:
      FRONTEND_URL: "https://3000-${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_ID}.${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_CLUSTER_HOST}"
      BACKEND_URL: "https://4567-${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_ID}.${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_CLUSTER_HOST}"
    build: ./backend-flask
    ports:
      - "4567:4567"
    volumes:
      - ./backend-flask:/backend-flask
  frontend-react-js:
    environment:
      REACT_APP_BACKEND_URL: "https://4567-${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_ID}.${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_CLUSTER_HOST}"
    build: ./frontend-react-js
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    volumes:
      - ./frontend-react-js:/frontend-react-js

# the name flag is a hack to change the default prepend folder
# name when outputting the image names
networks: 
  internal-network:
    driver: bridge
    name: cruddur
    
```

The extension in VScode should mean that the docker-compose.yml file is recognised in your VScode file explorer.  You should be able to right-click the file and be given an option for 'Compose up'.  Clicking this will build and launch both containers in a single click.  Alternatively, you can use the docker commandline:

```sh
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
docker compose up
```

##  Notifications TBD





# Other Challenges

## Run the dockerfile CMD as external script

I was a little unsure about this on first reading, but I think the task here is to investigate and run the CMD as a script, the "shell form" rather than using the "exec" form.

I did this by adding a simple one line script to the root of the flask app/container in the repo and then calling this script from the Dockerfile.  The script was called runflask.sh and simply contains:

```sh
python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
```

But clearly could be more complex and contain other tasks.

The Dockerfile becomes (old CMS commented out), this is just the final few lines, showing the only change.

```dockerfile
...
EXPOSE ${PORT}
# python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
#CMD [ "python3", "-m" , "flask", "run", "--host=0.0.0.0", "--port=4567"]
COPY runflask.sh runflask.sh
CMD sh runflask.sh
...
```

I have changed the dockerfile back to the exec form now but left both the alternative commented out.

Commit message:

added note on /frontend-react-js/node_modules

journal/week1.md, after:

# Week 1 — App Containerization

## Containers, gitpod and Docker

This week I have been working to take the two core components of the application, the frontend and the backend and containerise them using Docker.  This is a precursor to deploying the components as containers in ECS.  It also allows local development and testing directly with containers.

Using gitpod launched from the github repo is again the simplest way to develop.  There is a Docker extension for VSCode that should be preinstalled, however I had to install it manually from the marketplace the first time.  You may have to as well.  It is this extension:

![Docker Ext in GitPod](assets/docker-gitpod-01.png)

## Containerization of the Backend

### Testing at the command with Python

The backend application is found under backend-flask/ in the repo.  It is a python flask application and can be easily tested on the command line.   There is a python requirements file that is used with pip to install the flask and flask-cors prereqs.  To run and test do :

```sh
cd backend-flask
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
export FRONTEND_URL="*"
export BACKEND_URL="*"
python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
cd ..
```

This should run the backend, you can test the APIs there return JSON, follow these steps:

- Unlock the port (4567) on the PORTS tab
- Right click and open the link associated with port 4567
- You will need to append a valid URL - '/api/activities/home'

You should see a valid JSON response

![backend running](assets/backend-run-01.png)

### Create the Dockerfile

You are now ready to convert these steps into a Dockerfile so that you can build a container to simplify the deployment and launch of the backend.

The Docker file needs to go in the backend-flask folder - 'backend-flask/Dockerfile'.  Create this file, here's the content:

```Dockerfile
FROM python:3.10-slim-buster

WORKDIR /backend-flask

COPY requirements.txt requirements.txt
RUN pip3 install -r requirements.txt

COPY . .

ENV FLASK_ENV=development

EXPOSE ${PORT}
# python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
CMD [ "python3", "-m" , "flask", "run", "--host=0.0.0.0", "--port=4567"]
```

Next up you can build the container, this actually creates the container within the docker framework.

### Build the BE Container

Build the container using the following.  Ensure you are in the GitPod Repo Root.

```sh
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
docker build -t  backend-flask ./backend-flask
```

This will build your image and you should see it in the Docker extension on the side bar.  Notice you have the base image requested in the FROM line in the Dockerfile and your new backend-flash image:

![backend container built](assets/backend-flask-01.png)

The container images can also be listed with

```sh
docker image ls
```
You should see

```sh
REPOSITORY      TAG                IMAGE ID       CREATED         SIZE
backend-flask   latest             c964c1371d44   9 minutes ago   129MB
python          3.10-slim-buster   b5d627f77479   2 weeks ago     118MB
```

You are now ready to test running your backend container.

### Running the BE Container

The container can be run using the docker command line tool.  You need to specify the port mapping in order to publish port 4567.  It is also necessary at this stage to provide some URL environment variables, or the application with hit an HTTP 500 server error.  

There are a few ways to pass the required env vars in, here's an example using -e on the docker run command line.

```sh
export FRONTEND_URL="*"
export BACKEND_URL="*"
docker run --rm -p 4567:4567 -it  -e FRONTEND_URL -e BACKEND_URL backend-flask
unset FRONTEND_URL="*"
unset BACKEND_URL="*"
```

The above commands should be successful and should launch a container right from the gitpod terminal/workspace.

![backend container running](assets/backend-flask-02.png)

Now test the access in the browser by ensure the port is unlocked in the ports tab and clicking the link.  Remember to suffix with a valid api entry point such as the /api/activities/home.  You should get the same valid JSON response as earlier.

You will notice that docker runs in the foreground and doesn't relinquish your shell.  Ctrl-C and run it again with the '-d' option, it will run in the background.  This allows you to inspect the running container with 'docker ps' or 'docker logs'.

```sh
docker run --rm -p 4567:4567 -it  -e FRONTEND_URL -e BACKEND_URL -d backend-flask
```

## Containerization of the Frontend

Now you have a container that we can launch to run the backend, you need to create the frontend container.

The frontend application is found under frontend-react-js/ in the repo.  It is a React application and requires node and various modules to run.  You need to run npm install to get this working.

### NPM Install

Simply do:

```sh 
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
cd frontend-react-js
npm i
```

This will take a few minutes to install.  You should see this somewhere near the bottom of the output.

```sh
added 1471 packages, and audited 1472 packages in 22s
```

### Create FE Dockerfile

The FE container, of course, also needs a Dockerfile.  Create this in the frontend-react-js folder, - 'Dockerfile'.

```dockerfile
FROM node:16.18

ENV PORT=3000

COPY . /frontend-react-js
WORKDIR /frontend-react-js
RUN npm install
EXPOSE ${PORT}
CMD ["npm", "start"]
```

This container is a bit easier, you are already ready to build it:

```sh
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
docker build -t frontend-react-js ./frontend-react-js
```

The container will now show up in the Docker extension of VSCode, alongside the new base layer, node.

![Node container built](assets/front-end-node-01.png)

### Run FE Container

Now it is built, you can run the FE container from the command line.  Again, remember to background it with -d.

```sh
docker run -p 3000:3000 -d frontend-react-js
```

Again, check the ports tab to ensure the new frontend port (3000) is unlocked and test in the browser.  If all is well you now see the Cruddur! front page!

##  Docker Compose

With more than one container in an application, it is very useful to orchestrate their launch and control.  This is done with Docker Compose.

I created a docker-compose.yml file which needs to sit at the root of the project.   Note that I had a problem with the npm install seeming not to work once the container was launched, which prevented the front end from launching through docker compose.  I had a quick fix of running 'npm i' as per the build steps, but this should have been covered by the npm install tasks in the docker file.  It turned out I needed to mount an additional volume (- /frontend-react-js/node_modules). This is included in the compose file below.

```yaml
version: "3.8"
services:
  backend-flask:
    environment:
      FRONTEND_URL: "https://3000-${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_ID}.${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_CLUSTER_HOST}"
      BACKEND_URL: "https://4567-${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_ID}.${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_CLUSTER_HOST}"
    build: ./backend-flask
    ports:
      - "4567:4567"
    volumes:
      - ./backend-flask:/backend-flask
  frontend-react-js:
    environment:
      REACT_APP_BACKEND_URL: "https://4567-${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_ID}.${GITPOD_WORKSPACE_CLUSTER_HOST}"
    build: ./frontend-react-js
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    volumes:
      - ./frontend-react-js:/frontend-react-js
      - /frontend-react-js/node_modules

# the name flag is a hack to change the default prepend folder
# name when outputting the image names
networks: 
  internal-network:
    driver: bridge
    name: cruddur
    
```

The extension in VScode should mean that the docker-compose.yml file is recognised in your VScode file explorer.  You should be able to right-click the file and be given an option for 'Compose up'.  Clicking this will build and launch both containers in a single click.  Alternatively, you can use the docker commandline:

```sh
cd $GITPOD_REPO_ROOT
docker compose up
```

##  Notifications TBD





# Other Challenges

## Run the dockerfile CMD as external script

I was a little unsure about this on first reading, but I think the task here is to investigate and run the CMD as a script, the "shell form" rather than using the "exec" form.

I did this by adding a simple one line script to the root of the flask app/container in the repo and then calling this script from the Dockerfile.  The script was called runflask.sh and simply contains:

```sh
python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
```

But clearly could be more complex and contain other tasks.

The Dockerfile becomes (old CMS commented out), this is just the final few lines, showing the only change.

```dockerfile
...
EXPOSE ${PORT}
# python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0 --port=4567
#CMD [ "python3", "-m" , "flask", "run", "--host=0.0.0.0", "--port=4567"]
COPY runflask.sh runflask.sh
CMD sh runflask.sh
...
```

I have changed the dockerfile back to the exec form now but left both the alternative commented out.
